Exam I- Study guide
These are not the test questions, but they will allow you to see how well you understand the
material. Remember, you are responsible for all of the material in the chapter that we had
lecture in the classroom.
Ch1- Human sand Microbial World
Name the three domains in the classification of living organisms.
a. Which domain/s have prokaryotic cells?
b. Which domain/s have Eukaryotic cells?
c. Which organelles does a prokaryotic cell have?
Which domain do fungi, protozoa, and helminths belong to? What is the characteristic of
each of these?
What is a virus made of?
Explain the theory of spontaneous generation. Who is given credit for disproving it and how
did how he do it?
Name the scientist who:
a. Is given credit for first observing microorganisms under the microscope.
b. Using phenol as a disinfectant.
c. Emphasized handwashing as a way to reduce the number of cases of puerperal fever
(Childbed fever).
d. Heated wine to around 60 degrees to reduce microorganism growth.
e. Developed postulates to prove a causative agent of a disease.
f. Is given credit for discovering penicillin.
g. Developed a smallpox vaccination.
How large are bacteria typically?
How large are viruses?
What is a micrometer?
Explain the four steps of gram stain:
a.
b.
c.
d.
What is the basis for the difference in staining (gram positive and gram negative)?
Name the different shapes that bacteria can have:
a.
b.
c.
What is a vibrio?
Are spirochetes and spirilla the same?
Which has better resolving power: an electron microscope or light microscope?
Ch2-Chemistry
Does water contain polar or nonpolar bonds?
Which compounds dissolve in water?
What happens in Hydrolysis reactions?
What happens in dehydration reactions?
Name 4 major groups of organic molecules. What does organic mean?
a.
b.
c.
d.
Name the major function of carbohydrates.
Do Carbohydrates dissolve in water?
What is a simple sugar? Give an example.
What is a disaccharide? Give an example.
What is a polysaccharide? Give an example.
How are monosaccharides combined to make polysaccharides?
How are polysaccharide broken down?
Name the major function of fat.
Do fats dissolve in water?
What are the two parts of triglyceride?
a.
b.
Are the fatty acid chains polar or nonpolar?
Name the major functions of proteins.
What is the monomer of proteins?
How are amino acids linked together?
Approximately how many different amino acids are there?
What is meant by primary structure of a protein?
What is meant by tertiary structure of a protein?
What is meant by quaternary structure of a protein?
What is denaturation and how does that affect protein function?
What are enzymes?
Name two major nucleic acids:
a.
b.
What are the binding blocks of nucleic acids?
a.
b.
Chap3- Microscopy and Cell Structure
how do prokaryotic cells compare in size to eukaryotic cells?
Can you draw the following morphologies?
a. Streptobacilli
b. streptococci
c. diplococci
d. staphylococci
e. vibrio
f. what does pleomorphic mean?
Name the three components of the cell envelope of a prokaryotic cell:
a.
b.
c.
Name 4 external structures of the prokaryotic cell:
a.
b.
c.
d.
What are pili?
What is the purpose of conjugation pili?
What is the purpose of fimbriae?
What is the glycocalyx?
What is a capsule? What is its function?
What is a slime layer? What is its function?
Can you diagram the following types of bacteria?
a. Amphitrichous
b. Monotrichous
c. Lophotrichous
d. Peritrichous
What is the cell membrane of a prokaryotic cell made of? What is its function?
What is the cell wall of prokaryotic cells made of?
What is the function of the prokaryotic cell wall? Explain in your own words.
diagram the difference between gram positive and gram-negative cell walls.
Which bacteria have lipopolysaccharide layer:
What is lipopolysaccharide?
What is the significance of lipid A?
What is an endotoxin?
What do endotoxins do in the body when released in large number?
Which bacteria have Teichoic acid?
Name two antibacterial that work by destroying peptidoglycan.
Do Archaea have peptide glycan in the cell wall?
How do Eukaryotic ribosomes and prokaryotic ribosomes differ?
Which are 70S? what are the subunits?
Which are 80S? what are the subunits?
what is the function of ribosomes?
How does a nucleus differ from a nucleoid?
What is a plasmid?
What is an inclusion?
What is an endospore?
Explain the process of sporulation in your own words.
What is it called when the endospores disappear, and the bacterial cell grow again?
Name the two genera that create endospores.
Ch4- Growth of Bacteria
Can you define the following terms?
a. Colony
b. Heterotrophic
c. Autotrophic
d. Fastidious
e. Obligate aerobe
f. Obligate anaerobe
g. Facultative anaerobe
h. Acidophile
i. Alkaliphile
j. Psychrophile
k. Mesophile
l. Thermophile
m. Barophile
n. Halophile
o. Pure culture
Can you explain the differences in each of these types of media?
Selective media
Differentia media
How would obligate aerobe and facultative anaerobe show different growth in nutrient broth?
Why would each of the following be necessary for bacteria?
a. Nitrogen
b. Sulfur
c. Phosphorus
d. Vitamins
explain the process of binary fission.
What is generation time?
What does it mean if bacteria have aa generation time of 30 minutes?
What happens during the lag phase of growth?
What happens during the exponential phase of growth?
What happens during the death phase of growth?
Are bacteria increasing in number during the stationary phase? Why or why not?
Write out the reaction catalyzed by the enzyme, superoxide dismutase?
Why is this an important enzyme?
Write out the reaction catalyzed by the enzyme, Catalase?
Why be catalase not made by obligate anaerobes?
What is the purpose of streak plate?
Ch5- Controlling growth of microorganisms
Define sepsis. What is its importance?
What is contamination?
What is the difference between “sterile and disinfected”?
What is the difference between “antiseptic and disinfectant”?
What is the difference between “bacteriocidal and bacteriostatic”?
What are the three mechanisms of action of disinfectants against microorganisms?
Physical methods:
Heat
• Why is moist heat advantageous over dry heat?
• Can boiling completely sterilize a liquid?
• Describe the conditions in an autoclave.
• What types of microorganisms would you want to eliminate from milk?
Cold
• Is refrigeration/ freezing/ drying(dessication) kill bacteria? Explain?
• lyophilization?
Radiation:
• Nonionizing radiation: UV light
• Ionizing radiation:
Filtration:
Osmotic pressure: salting
Chemical methods:
• Phenol
• Alcohol
Halogens:
• Chlorine(water)
• iodine
• Bromine (water)
• Fluorine (water)
oxidizers:
Ozone: (water)
Surfactants:
• Soap
• quats
metals:
• mercury
• siver nitrate: to prevent gonorrhea
• copper
• zinc
alkylating agents (aldehydes):
• formaldehyde
• glutaraldehyde
gaseous agents
• Ethylene oxide (ETO)
Organic acids: foods
• sorbic acid
Ch6- Metabolism
What is cellular respiration?
Do bacteria need vitamins? Why?
Do bacteria breakdown glucose to get ATP?
What does heterotrophic mean?
What is the role of niacin in metabolism?
Where are endoenzymes made? Where do they work? Can you give an example?
What is the role of riboflavin in metabolism?
Would you expect obligate anaerobes to undergo cellular respiration with oxygen? Why or why
not?
What happens during glycolysis?
Write out the basic reaction here:
Is ATP made?
Is NADH made? Why is that important?
Does this reaction require oxygen?
Where in the cell does this reaction occur?
What happens during fermentation? Is ATP made during this last step of fermentation?
Is NADH made during this last step of fermentation?
So, what is the n et yield of glycolysis +fermentation?
Do these reactions require oxygen?
Name three organic products that could be produced during fermentation.
Name the two processes that occur in anaerobic metabolism.
When oxygen is present, what happens to the pyruvic acid produced in glycolysis?
Where do the reactions of the krebs cycle occur in eukaryotes?
Where do the reactions of the krebs cycle occur in prokaryotes?
What are the products of the krebs cycle?
What happens in the electron transport chain? Diagram here?
Where does this occur in eukaryotes? In prokaryotes?
What are the products?
How many ATP are made in the electron transport chain from 1 NADH?
How many ATP are made in the electron transport chain from 1 FADH2?
Is oxygen required for the electron transport chain? Where?
What is the final electron acceptor in electron transport chain?
Do all prokaryotes use oxygen as the ultimate electron acceptor in the electron transport chain?
Give an example?
How can fats and proteins be used to make ATP?
Why do fats generate more ATP than glucose?
Which element would an amino acid have to lose to become a krebs cycle intermediate?
Write out the reaction for photosynthesis?
Explain how this is the opposite of cellular respiration?
How does this link plants and animals in the circle of life?
What are the products of photosynthesis?
What are the products of cellular respiration?
