= Glossary =

== A ==
* [[topics/antibody|Antibody]] :: No description yet.
* [[topics/antigen|Antigen]] :: - [[antibody]]

== C ==
* [[topics/conjugation|Conjugation]] :: - Plasmids: contains F plasmid → F+; does not contain → F-  

== D ==
* [[topics/David Bergey|David Bergey]] :: - description for all 'known species'  

== E ==
* [[topics/enzymes|Enzymes]] :: Tags: biochemistry, catalysis, proteins, metabolism, 

== H ==
* [[topics/Histones|Histones]] :: Tags: Chapter 10, Eukaryotes
* [[topics/horizontal_gene_transfer|Horizontal_gene_transfer]] :: DNA from one bacteria to another:  

== L ==
* [[topics/lysogenic_cycle|Lysogenic_cycle]] :: The lysogenic cycle is a method of viral reproduction where a bacteriophage integrates its DNA into the host bacterium's genome, 
* [[topics/lytic_cycle|Lytic_cycle]] :: The lytic cycle is often separated into six stages: attachment, penetration, transcription, biosynthesis, maturation, and lysis.

== M ==
* [[topics/mycosis|Mycosis]] :: disease caused by fungus

== P ==
* [[topics/pcr|Pcr]] :: No description yet.
* [[topics/peptide_bond|Peptide_bond]] :: A peptide bond is a covalent bond formed between the amino group of one amino acid and the carboxyl group of another, releasing a molecule of water (condensation reaction).
* [[topics/plasmid|Plasmid]] :: A plasmid is a small, circular DNA molecule that exists independently of the bacterial chromosome.
* [[topics/plasmodia|Plasmodia]] :: parasitic protists that can cause maleria
* [[topics/proteins|Proteins]] :: Proteins are large biomolecules composed of amino acids.
* [[topics/protists|Protists]] :: Usually single-celled eukaryotes that are not fungi, plants, or animals.

== R ==
* [[topics/ribosome|Ribosome]] :: made of protein + [[rna|RNA]]
* [[topics/ringworm|Ringworm]] :: Is Nematode
* [[topics/rna|Rna]] :: Contains U, A, G, C

== S ==
* [[topics/serotype|Serotype]] :: Tags: Ch. 10
* [[topics/serovar|Serovar]] :: Tags: Ch. 10
* [[topics/shizogony|Shizogony]] :: multiple asexual fission

== T ==
* [[topics/Taxonomy|Taxonomy]] :: The science of characterizing
* [[topics/transduction|Transduction]] :: - DNA transferred between bacteria via bacteriophage  
* [[topics/transformation|Transformation]] :: bacteria die and DNA absorbed by living bacteria  
* [[topics/transposon|Transposon]] :: Jumping DNA:  

== V ==
* [[topics/vertical_gene_transfer|Vertical_gene_transfer]] :: DNA passed from one bacteria generation to the Next

